---
published: true
layout: post
title: The Econ 351 Mathematics for Economics
category: Mathematids
tags:
  - econ351
  - mathematics
---
## ECON351

### Differential Equation

[Learn Differential Equations: Up Close with Gilbert Strang and Cleve Moler](https://ocw.mit.edu/resources/res-18-009-learn-differential-equations-up-close-with-gilbert-strang-and-cleve-moler-fall-2015/)


[MITx: 18.031x Introduction to Differential Equations](https://courses.edx.org/courses/course-v1:MITx+18.031x+1T2017/courseware/unit1/01_odeintro/?child=first)


Can you guess my secret function y(t)?

Clue: It satisfies the differential equation

$$\dot{y} = 3y,$$


which could model population growth in some biological system, like the growth of yeast cells. Note that y˙ is common notation for the derivative with respect to time; y˙, y′, and dy/dt all mean the same thing here.

Maybe you guessed y=e3t. This is **a solution** to the differential equation above, because substituting it into the DE gives 3e3t=3e3t. But it's not the function I was thinking of! Some other solutions are y=7e3t, y=−5e3t, y=0, etc. From calculus we know that the family of functions

 $$\displaystyle  y=ce^{3t}$$
 
is the **general solution** .

Saying this means that

for each number c, the function y=ce3t is a solution, and

there are no other solutions besides these.

So there is a 1-parameter family of solutions to this DE. The constant c is a parameter .

You still haven't guessed my secret function.

Clue 2: My function satisfies the initial condition y(0)=5.

There is a number c such that y(t)=ce3t holds for all t; we need to find c. Plugging in t=0 shows that


$$5 = c e^0, \, \,  \text { so }\, \,  c=5.$$

Thus, among the infinitely many solutions to the DE, the solution satisfying the initial condition y(0)=5 is


$$y(t)=5e^{3t}.$$

#### Definition 3.2   An initial value problem is a differential equation together with initial conditions.

**Important**: Checking a solution to a DE is usually easier than finding the solution in the first place, so it is often worth doing. Just plug in the function to both sides, and also check that it satisfies the initial condition.

In the solution to the DE, only one initial condition was needed, since only one parameter c needed to be recovered.











